Drug Information Sources
A study conducted in USA have found differences between general and subspecialist pediatricians regarding information sources currently used to obtain labeling data and to influence their prescribing behavior. The top 5 sources used to obtain drug information are: journals, pediatric dosage books, AAP News, drug representatives and PDA-based databases. The generalists are more likely than subspecialist to use AAP News and drug representatives to obtain pediatric labeling information.  Because the undue influence of drug representatives on prescribing pattern in favor of the newest and often more expensive drugs when cheaper alternatives are available many healthcare systems have restricted physicians’ interaction with drug representatives.
Physicians' personal prescribing habits
The UK General Medical Council “GMC” and Irish guidelines advise physicians that they should not treat or prescribe for themselves, family members and others with whom they have a close personal relationship. A survey conducted in Ireland showed that the prescribing outside doctor-patient relationship is widespread despite clear guidance advising against it (Two- thirds of respondents had self- prescribed, over 70% had prescribed to family, and nearly 60% had prescribed to a friend or colleague). The consequences of this practice; The personal knowledge and attachment to the patient could lead the physician to prescribing inappropriately or even causing harm. In addition, the patient may not be as entirely forth coming with important information.
Pharmaceutical sampling and detailing
The U.S. pharmaceutical industry spent upwards of $18 billion on marketing efforts in 2005 but the marketers are unable to identify which marketing activities have the greatest growth potential.
Pharmaceutical industry need to determine which physicians to target as well as when and how to target them. “Dynamic Allocation of Pharmaceutical Detailing and Sampling” study showed a high degree of physicians’ heterogeneity and dynamics and substantial long term effects for detailing and sampling. At the low prescription-behavior state, physicians make only a few prescriptions for the new drug because they need to acquire information about the drug. So physicians in this state may be responsive to information-based marketing initiatives. In contrast, physicians at the higher prescription-behavior state are likely to be affected by retention-type marketing initiatives.
So detailing has a strong effect in moving physicians away from the inactive state and sampling is most effective in keeping them in the frequent state. Whereas detailing may be more useful as an acquisition tool, sampling is more useful as a retention tool. In addition, this study demonstrates that sampling in the short term has a stronger effect relative to detailing while in the long term, detailing has a stronger effect. 
PATIENTS' AWARENESS OF AND ATTITUDES TOWARD GIFTS FROM PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES TO PHYSICIANS
Many studies have shown the negative impact of pharmaceutical company on prescribing pattern but an important question in this topic: what do patient think?
This is the purpose of a study conducted in Alger country, the participants asked for three important questions: Do you believe that receiving a gift from pharmaceutical company influences physician's prescribing decision? What effect do you think gifts to physicians from drug companies have on the cost of medication? Do you think physicians should disclose personal gifts received (such as travel expenses, dinners, books, etc.) from drug companies?
As a result, most of participants are not aware of the breadth of gifts offered by pharmaceutical company to doctors; Awareness of gifts varied from 94 percent for free drug samples to 19 percent for golf tournament fees. The higher a patient's educational level, the more likely he or she was to believe gifts influence prescribing habits.  Also this study found that patients believe that gifts to physicians increase the cost of medication. In conclusion, the physician occupies a unique role, trust, and fiduciary responsibility in society, if patients do not trust that their physician has their best interests in mind, then the heart of medicine is undermined.

Pharmaceutical Marketing and Price
 A study was conducted in USA to explore the distinction between consumer price sensitivity and the influence of promotion on price levels.
DTC advertising is aimed directly at patients and includes drugs advertising in media such as television, radio, newspaper, magazine and Internet. It focused on a small portion of drugs and most brands are not advertised directly to consumers. (Wosinka (2002) find that in general, promotion aimed to physicians affect prescription choice more than DTC advertising)
Two competing theories on advertising’s effects: “Advertising= Market Power” and “Advertising= Information”
For “Advertising= Market Power” view, the large expenditures build competitive advantage in order to induce brand loyalty. The increased brand loyalty makes consumers less price sensitive and enable firms to make excessive profits. The market power school argues that prices increase due of the market power accrued by the advertised.
For “Advertising=Information” view, the advertising provides the consumer information on products features, price and quality and the advertising has little impact on prices.
Four hypothesis are tested in this study;
H1: DTC advertising for prescription drugs decreases the price elasticity for that drug
H2: Journal advertising for prescription drugs decreases the price elasticity for that drug
H3: Detailing for prescription drugs decreases the price elasticity for that drug
H4: Sampling for prescription drugs decreases the price elasticity for that drug
For the first hypothesis, no statically significant relationship between DTC advertising and price for four of the five drug categories studied.
For the second hypothesis, no statically significant relationship between Journals advertising and price for four of the five drug categories studied.
For the third hypothesis, statically significant relationship between detailing and price for three of the five drug categories studied.
For the fourth hypothesis, significant decrease in price elasticity for three of the five drug categories studied.
In conclusion, product sampling was the only promotional activities that decrease price elasticity for certain drugs.
Influence of pharmacist on prescribing pattern
A survey was administered to a sample of 705 physicians in Sana’a city in order to determine the influence of the expertise, collaborative efforts and trustworthiness of pharmacist on physicians’ prescribing pattern.
The expertise of pharmacists is based on their knowledge, information and skills relevant to prescribing drugs.
The collaboration between pharmacist and physician can reduce healthcare costs and improve patient outcomes.
The trustworthiness is based on the trust of physician by the pharmacist.
Three hypothesis are tested in this study;
H1: Pharmacist expertise positively influences physician prescribing decisions.
H2: Pharmacist collaboration positively influences physician prescribing decisions
H3: Pharmacist trustworthiness positively influences physician prescribing decisions
As results, there is a positive significant relationship between physicians prescribing decisions and pharmacist collaboration and trustworthiness. Pharmacist expertise did not significantly influence physician prescribing decisions. So these findings affirmed the role of pharmacist in the prescription decision.

References:
1-Yoon EY, Clark SJ, Gorman R, Nelson S, O'Connor KG, Freed GL. Differences in pediatric drug information sources used by general versus subspecialist pediatricians. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2010
2-Hartnett Y, Drakeford C, Dunne L, et al; Physician, heal thyself: a cross-sectional survey of doctors’ personal prescribing habits. Journal of Medical Ethics.2020
3- Montoya, Netzer, and Jedidi ; Dynamic Allocation of Pharmaceutical Detailing and Sampling. Marketing Science.2010
4- Jastifer J, Roberts S.; Patients' awareness of and attitudes toward gifts from pharmaceutical companies to physicians. Int J Health Serv. 2009
5- Michael L. Capella, Charles R. Taylor, Randall C. Campbell and Lance S. Longwell ; Do Pharmaceutical Marketing Activities Raise Prices? Evidence from Five Major Therapeutic Classes. Journal of public policy&Marketing.2009
6-Murshid, Mohsen Ali; Mohaidin and Zurina; Influence of the expertise, collaborative efforts and trustworthiness of pharmacists on the prescribing decisions of physicians. Journal of Pharmacy Practice & Research. Apr2019
